Add `atmos describe affected` CLI command. Update docs website (#274)
cloudposse/atmos: website/docs/cli/commands/describe/describe-affected.md

---
title: atmos describe affected
sidebar_label: affected
sidebar_class_name: command
id: affected
description: This command produces a list of the affected Atmos components and stacks given two Git commits.
---

:::note Purpose
Use this command to show a list of the affected Atmos components and stacks given two Git commits.
:::

<br/>

:::info
For the first commit, the command assumes that the repo root is a Git checkout.

The second commit is specified on the command line by using the `--ref` or `--sha` flags.

> If the flags are not provided, it will clone the HEAD of the default branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the flags are not provided, the `ref` be the default branch (e.g. `main`) and the `sha` will point to the `HEAD` of the branch.
```

Reviewer: The fact that we clone it, will always be the case. I think we should describe our logic of how this works in plain English.

This command works by:
1. Cloning the branch (`--ref`) and checking out the commit (`--sha`) of the target branch. 
2. Deep merge all configurations for both the current working branch and the target branch
3. Compare each section of the stack configuration looking for differences
4. Look for changes in the component directories
5. De-dupe affected stacks
6. Output a JSON document consisting of a list of affected stacks and what caused it to be affected

:::

## Usage

```shell
atmos describe affected [options]
```

<br/>

:::tip
Run `atmos describe affected --help` to see all the available options
:::

## Examples

```shell
atmos describe affected
atmos describe affected --verbose=true
atmos describe affected --ref refs/heads/main
atmos describe affected --ref refs/heads/my-new-branch --verbose=true
atmos describe affected --ref refs/heads/main --format json
atmos describe affected --ref refs/tags/v1.16.0 --file affected.yaml --format yaml
atmos describe affected --sha 3a5eafeab90426bd82bf5899896b28cc0bab3073 --file affected.json
atmos describe affected --sha 3a5eafeab90426bd82bf5899896b28cc0bab3073

> ```

Reviewer: Ideally, we should break each of these apart and explain what it does. 

for example, 

~~~
This command will describe all affected stacks relative to the default branch
```
atmos describe affected
```

This command will describe all affected stacks relative to the main branch provide verbose output including every step performed to arrive at the conclusion. 

```
atmos describe affected --verbose=true
```

~~~

| `--verbose` | Print more detailed output when cloning and checking out the Git repository                                                                                     | no       |

## Output

The command outputs a list of objects (in JSON or YAML formats).

Each object has the following schema:

```json
{
  "stack": "....",
  "component_type": "....",
  "component": "....",
  "affected": "....."
}
```

where:

- `stack` is the affected Atmos stack
- `component` is the affected Atmos component in the stack
- `component_type` is the type of the affected Atmos component (`terraform` or `helmfile`)
- `affected` shows what was changed for the component. The possible values are:

  - `vars` - the `vars` component section in the stack config has been modified
  - `env` - the `env` component section in the stack config has been modified
  - `settings` - the `settings` component section in the stack config has been modified
  - `metadata` - the `metadata` component section in the stack config has been modified
  - `terraform` - the Terraform component (Terraform files) that the affected Atmos component provisions has been changed

>   - `helmfile` - the Helmfile component (Helmfile files) that the affected Atmos component provisions has been changed

Reviewer: IMO, this should just be consolidated to `component`, as `component_type` will be the indicator of if it's `terraform` or `helmfile`

Reviewer: Consider changing affected to be disambiguated a little bit: `stack.vars` or `stack.env`.

repository (`.git` folder does not exist or is configured incorrectly).

The second commit is specified on the command line by using
the `--ref` ([Git References](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-References)) or `--sha` (commit SHA) flags.

Either `--ref` or `--sha` should be used. If both flags are provided at the same time, the command will first clone the remote branch pointed to by
the `--ref` flag and then checkout the Git commit pointed to by the `--sha` flag (`--sha` flag overrides `--ref` flag).

If the flags are not provided, the `ref` will be set automatically to the reference to the default branch (e.g. `main`) and the commit SHA will point
to the `HEAD` of the branch.

The command works by:

- Cloning the branch (`--ref`) or checking out the commit (`--sha`) of the remote target branch
- Deep merging all stack configurations for both the current working branch and the target branch
- Looking for changes in the component directories
- Comparing each section of the stack configuration looking for differences
- Output a JSON or YAML document consisting of a list of affected components and stacks and what caused it to be affected

> 

Reviewer: @aknysh if both the component and stacks are affected, which will be output as the `affected` entity?

> <br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Atmos first checks the component folders for changes, if it finds any affected files, it will mark all related stacks as affected. Atmos will then skip evaluating those stacks for differences since we already know that they are affected.

<br/>
```
